***Acknowledgements***
*We would like to thank all the journalists and editors, as well as
those representatives from various chat app companies, who spoke to us
during the research phase of this report. We list many of them by name
in a following chapter, but there were a number of others not mentioned
specifically who contributed necessary background briefings and
guidance. Many thanks, too, to Claire Wardle, Pete Brown, Elizabeth
Boylan, and Abigail Ronck from the Tow Center for their help with
feedback, logistics, and proofreading. 
November, 2015

Executive Summary
=================

Messaging apps now have more global users than traditional social
networks—which means they will play an increasingly important role in
the distribution of digital journalism in the future. While chat
platforms initially rose to prominence by offering a low-cost, web-based
alternative to SMS, over time they evolved into multimedia hubs that
support photos, videos, games, payments, and more.

While many news organizations don't yet use messaging apps, digitally
savvy outlets like BuzzFeed, Mashable, The Huffington Post, and VICE
have accompanied a more traditional player in BBC News by establishing a
presence on a number of these platforms.

To complement our research, we interviewed leadership at multiple news
outlets and chat platforms, thereby synthesizing key lessons and
presenting notable case studies reflecting the variety of creative and
strategic work taking place within the messaging space. Most publisher
efforts around messaging apps are still in a formative, experimental
stage, but even those have often proven effective in diversifying
traffic sources for digital content.

Drawing upon our interviews and case studies, we identify a number of
opportunities and challenges for organizations using—or hoping to
use—messaging apps for news. We argue that to devise a successful
messaging app strategy, publishers must understand regional strongholds,
user demographics, and popular features of each app. Advantages to the
chat ecosystem include huge, untapped audiences; high engagement through
push notifications; unique products like stickers and “chatbots” (see
glossary for definitions); and the opportunity to build community
through chat rooms and crowdsourced storytelling. Meanwhile, challenges
include limited analytics tools and a fragmented social landscape
boasting roughly a dozen messaging apps, each with over 50 million
registered users.

Our case studies illustrate a number of ways in which major news outlets
have utilized various messaging apps, each with its own niche
characteristics. In the past two years, many platforms—including
Snapchat, Viber, Kik, LINE, WeChat, and Telegram—introduced official
channels that publishers like CNN, *The New York Times*, The Huffington
Post, and Cliff Central now leverage for content distribution and user
engagement. Other players, like WhatsApp, have no official offering for
media owners, but this has not deterred organizations—most notably the
BBC—from launching experimental campaigns.

Our research indicates that one of the greatest benefits of chat apps is
the opportunity to use these platforms as live, sandbox environments.
The chance to play and iterate has helped several news organizations
develop mobile-first content and experiential offerings that would have
proved difficult in other digital environments. As these services
primarily—and in some cases exclusively—exist on mobile phones,
editorial teams have learned to focus purely on the mobile experience,
freeing themselves from considerations about how content will appear on
desktop websites or other broadcast mediums.

As happened after the early days of social media, before which a
proliferation of services (some with regional strengths) led to intense
competition for user attention, we expect to see some eventual
consolidation among chat apps. While Facebook Messenger and Skype do not
garner much focus in this report, we believe they could become
significant players in this space over the coming year as they figure
out the right proposition for their platforms to partner with media
organizations.

Elsewhere, we conclude that issues around information, privacy, personal
security, and mobile data penetration will unfold in different ways
around the world; apps like Telegram and FireChat are among those at the
forefront of addressing and solving these problems. They, in conjunction
with similar applications, are likely to see an increase in user uptake
as they meet needs that other major chat apps are unable to serve.

In developing editorial strategies for some of these wide-ranging
messaging platforms, news organizations are not just helping to
future-proof themselves, they are also venturing into online spaces that
could enable them to reach hundreds of millions of (often young) people
with whom they have never engaged before.

### Key Observations

The key findings of this report can be summarized as follows:

-   Messaging apps offer strong opportunities to engage new or
    difficult-to-reach demographics. For example, Snapchat, a very
    popular app among millennials, has been credited with engaging and
    informing young audiences on complex issues like the Iran nuclear
    deal.

-   Innovations such as bespoke (or customized) stickers and emojis can
    help news outlets quickly build significant audiences via messaging
    apps.

-   Messaging apps enable news outlets to gather (potentially exclusive)
    user-generated content and can become a major source during breaking
    news situations (e.g., as in the BBC's coverage of the second Nepal
    earthquake in 2015).

-   News outlets may need to experiment with a variety of chat apps to
    decipher which content type best suits the audiences of each app.
    BuzzFeed, for example, had considerably more success using LINE for
    soft news than for hard news.

-   Messaging apps can provide unique opportunities for giving audiences
    direct access to content and publishers, be it through tailormade
    WeChat platforms (Cliff Central) or Public Chats on Viber (The
    Huffington Post).

-   Messaging apps provide a space for news outlets to engage their
    audiences with different—possibly lighter—types of content (e.g.,
    *The Washington Post* has used Kik to distribute games, quizzes, and
    chat adventures).

-   Even apps that are not as geared toward publishing as some of their
    competitors, such as WhatsApp, hold great potential for news outlets
    if used strategically.

-   Messaging apps not only facilitate communication with eyewitnesses
    in areas where other forms of communication aren't functioning
    (e.g., during extreme weather conditions), they can also provide a
    platform for people who don't feel safe speaking on the telephone.
    Additionally, apps such as Telegram focus strongly on encryption and
    security.

-   Messaging apps are not used solely to drive traffic to websites
    (e.g., BuzzFeed is using LINE as part of a more distributed strategy
    and aims to provide as much information as possible inside the app,
    rather than direct users to its website).

-   When sourcing user-generated content, apps like WhatsApp, which are
    tied to a user's phone number, can significantly speed up the
    verification process as they provide a direct line to the content
    creator/eyewitness.

-   Messaging apps are relatively new and evolving at a rapid pace.
    Consequently, many news outlets are still in the process of
    establishing strategies to best utilize these platforms.

-   There is emerging evidence that messaging apps may drive traffic
    back to outlets' other, more traditional platforms (e.g., CNN's
    Snapchat Discover drove people to seek out longer-form content on
    CNN's TV news channel).

Introduction:The Dawn of the Social Messaging Era
=================================================

“The social media phase of the Internet ended,” declared Fred Wilson—a
leading venture capitalist and early investor in Twitter, Foursquare,
and Tumblr—in his 2014 “What Just Happened?” year-in-review. He
continued:

> Entrepreneurs and developers still build social applications. We still
> use them. But there isn't much innovation here anymore…messaging is
> the new social media…families use WhatsApp groups instead of Facebook.
> Kids use Snapchat instead of Instagram. Facebook's acquisition of
> WhatsApp in February of this year was the transaction that defined
> this trend.<sup><a href=#citations>1</a></sup>

![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page6_Chart.png)

While Wilson's views may be surprising to some, statistics support them.
Business Insider Intelligence released an infographic in April titled
“Messaging Apps Have Caught Up to Social Networks,” indicating that
major chat apps (WeChat, Viber, WhatsApp, and Facebook Messenger) now
have more combined users than the top social networks (Twitter,
LinkedIn, Facebook, and Instagram).<sup><a href=#citations>2</a></sup> And according to Mary
Meeker's “Internet Trends 2015” report, messaging apps make up 60
percent of the top 10 global apps by both usage and number of
sessions.<sup><a href=#citations>3</a></sup> Like any presumed overnight success, WhatsApp's
rise was actually part of a broader movement that took years to coalesce
within a zeitgeist moment. Facebook's \$22-billion purchase of the app
merely marked the day that everyone, even those with limited interest in
technology, learned that the era of social messaging had arrived.

Any user now downloading the world's 10 biggest chat apps for the first
time may be struck by their similarities. Dig deeper into their
histories, though, and you'll see that each company conquered the globe
with one unique, core innovation before incorporating some of its
competitors' strongest ideas: LINE popularized stickers, Viber perfected
free mobile calling, Snapchat invented ephemeral messaging, Kik
pioneered mobile chat anonymity, Telegram supplied chat encryption,
Tango delivered mobile video chat, WhatsApp introduced the simplicity of
free texting, and WeChat created the messaging app as mobile web portal.
Facebook Messenger, for its part, forged an amalgam of all those apps,
and now looks to differentiate itself with the introduction of M, an
artificial intelligence chat assistant.

Objectives and Methods
----------------------

In this guide, we explore the critical role chat apps can play in the
distribution of digital journalism today and in the years ahead. As
mobile traffic and referrals from social platforms continue to grow for
the majority of news organizations, chat apps present a profound
opportunity for audience development and engagement.

According to Pew Research Center's “State of the News Media 2015”
report, 78 percent of the top 50 digital news websites receive more
visits from mobile devices than desktop computers. And analytics firm
Parse.ly, which delivers audience insights to over 400 news
organizations including *Wired*, *The Atlantic*, and Reuters, claims 43
percent of referrals to its publisher network now come from social media
(outpacing search at 38 percent).

Messaging has emerged as the new frontier of social on mobile, and the
sheer size of audiences on the top global chat apps is too big to
ignore. These apps also present an opportunity to diversify mobile
traffic sources and to minimize vulnerability should Facebook or other
platforms decrease traffic for publishers.

For our research, we conducted interviews with leadership at numerous
major messaging app companies, as well as early-adopter news
organizations. We selected companies and case studies that demonstrate
the diversity of opportunities within the ecosystem, while also
highlighting the uniqueness of each chat app platform.

While publishers generally indicated optimism and excitement for their
work on chat apps, nearly all pointed out that as an industry we are
still in an early, exploratory phase. Most major chat apps spent the
last few years perfecting their user experience, only recently turning
their attention to media-owner partnerships. With that in mind, we urge
readers to not only learn from the case studies presented, but also to
initiate experiments of their own to find the right strategy for any
editorial team.

A Brief History of Chat Apps
----------------------------

Modern instant messaging and SMS both began their march to prominence in
the early and mid-1990s. The difference between the two is subtle: SMS
(the acronym for “short service message”) allows mobile phone users to
send each other text messages without an Internet connection, whereas
instant messaging enables similar functionality via the web. The first
SMS message was sent over the Vodafone GSM network in the United Kingdom
on December 3, 1992, with the words “Merry Christmas.” Israeli firm
Mirabilis released the first widely used online messenger, ICQ (short
for “I Seek You”), in 1996.

Precursors to ICQ date as far back as 1961 when MIT's Computation Center
built the Compatible Time Sharing System (CTSS), allowing up to 30 users
to log-in concurrently and share text messages. CompuServe's CB
Simulator, released in 1980, is generally recognized as the first
dedicated online chat service; it required users to pay monthly fees for
membership.

In 1985, Commodore launched Quantum Link (or “Q-Link”), an online
service for Commodore 64 and 128 that enabled multi-person chat, file
sharing, electronic email, games, and news via modem connection. Quantum
Link changed its name to America Online (AOL) in 1991, and by the
mid-90s was the leading U.S. Internet service provider and portal to the
web.

The company launched AOL Instant Messenger (AIM) in 1997 and purchased
competitor ICQ in 1998 to consolidate its primacy over instant
messaging. Along with a few competitors, it also pioneered chat robots
like StudyBuddy and SmarterChild that provided information and played
games with users.

In 2006, AIM controlled 52 percent of the instant messaging market, but
it struggled to monetize and went into rapid decline in the face of
competition from services like Google Talk, Yahoo! Chat, MSN Messenger,
and Skype. The growing popularity of BlackBerry Messenger in the late
2000s also pointed to a bright future for mobile messaging.

By the time mobile chat apps like WhatsApp and Kik arrived in 2009, SMS
was king. Mobile texting became a key mode of global, personal
communication, earning billions of dollars for telecommunications
companies.

But time and technology did not prove kind to telephone-service
companies. As smartphones began to proliferate, messaging apps were an
increasingly accessible solution to a simple problem: SMS is expensive
in most countries, so why not text or call much more cheaply, or for
free, via the mobile web?

SMS volume peaked in 2012, and chat apps surpassed SMS in global message
volume for the first time in 2013.<sup><a href=#citations>4</a></sup> By January 2015,
WhatsApp alone hosted 30 billion messages per day compared to about 20
billion for SMS.<sup><a href=#citations>5</a></sup>

As Wi-Fi and high-speed mobile networks hit critical mass in many
markets, chat apps quickly became multimedia hubs where users could
easily share videos, photos, stickers, games, articles, live streams,
and more. Between 2013 and 2014, many messengers turned their attention
to monetizing their massive audiences, and in doing so introduced tools
for publishers and brands.

Facebook: A Company Reinvented for the Messaging Era
----------------------------------------------------


![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page9_Graph.png)

With a mix of foresight and irony, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg has
done more than most to close the era of social networking and usher in
one of social messaging. In 2014, he placed two massive bets on
messaging: a \$22-billion purchase of the world's leading chat app,
WhatsApp, and a new requirement that Facebook users download a
standalone Messenger app to converse with friends.

By September 2015, WhatsApp and Messenger had 1.6 billion active,
monthly accounts combined—outpacing Facebook's 1.49 billion active,
monthly accounts. The company also launched an open API for Messenger,
encouraging developers and publishers to build custom apps for the
ecosystem. It simultaneously began beta testing Businesses on Messenger,
a tool facilitating e-commerce and customer support. In August 2015,
Instagram, another of Facebook's acquisitions, launched enhanced
one-to-one messaging—encouraging users to share photos and videos from
the news feed within private chats.

A Flow from East to West
------------------------

Despite the boldness of Zuckerberg's repositioning, Facebook was
responding to trends more than shaping them. A large swath of chat app
innovation continues to originate in Asia on platforms like WeChat and
LINE, and Western apps often appropriate those platforms' best products.

WeChat, in particular, has a monolithic presence in China reminiscent of
late 1990s Internet portals like AOL and Yahoo (with a modern mobile
twist). Users not only talk to friends and consume news on the app, but
also make purchases, pay utility bills, book taxis and doctors
appointments, enroll in brand loyalty programs, monitor traffic and air
pollution, and report incidents to the police.

That dominance of the mobile web in countries like China might not be as
likely in other markets, but it has served as inspiration for ambitious
Western chat apps plotting roadmaps for growth and monetization. Like
WeChat, Japan's LINE is also incredibly advanced in its product
offerings, grossing \$656 million in revenue in 2014. By contrast, while
leading Western messenger apps may boast multibillion-dollar valuations,
they often have profit and loss sheets in the red.

Time will tell if the same winning strategies will work halfway around
the world. But for news organizations in North America and Europe
looking for a glimpse of how the market may look in one to two years,
downloading WeChat and LINE is the best place to start.

Regional and Demographic Strongholds
------------------------------------

When devising your own strategy for messaging apps, it's vital to select
the right platform mix for your organization, based on three core
criteria:

1.  **Regional Strongholds:** Only a small group of apps like WhatsApp,
    Facebook Messenger, and Viber can be said to be truly global—and
    even those platforms struggle in certain countries. Meanwhile,
    messengers like WeChat, LINE, and KakaoTalk completely dominate
    specific markets but have negligible traction in others.

2.  **Demographics:** It's a common misconception that messaging apps
    are a uniformly millennial phenomenon. Some apps like Snapchat and
    LINE skew both young and female, but others like Tango (which boasts
    100 million monthly, active users, by our estimate) predominantly
    appeal to those aged 25–54 and strongly over-index with Hispanic and
    African-American users.

3.  **Product Features:** If your primary goal is to drive traffic
    directly back to your website, that won't be possible with apps like
    Snapchat that don't support clickable URL links. And if you want to
    launch a sticker/emoji-pack campaign, LINE and Viber are great
    options, but you can rule out both WhatsApp and Snapchat. Each app
    has a particular set of features, so make sure to choose one that
    supports the activation you have in mind.

Industry Challenges
-------------------

1.  **Fragmentation:** The social media landscape is entering a period
    of hyper-fragmentation that may be a challenge to publishers:
    Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram continue to loom large, but social
    media managers can now launch official channels on roughly 10 chat
    apps with over 50 million monthly, active users each.

    BuzzFeed, a perennial innovator in digital audience development,
    provides a great example of what it looks like to be on nearly all
    of these platforms. Starting with the launch of a share-to-WhatsApp
    button on mobile in February 2014, BuzzFeed has also built an
    official presence on seven additional major messengers, as seen in
    the timeline below.

2.  **Analytics:** For organizations accustomed to robust, real-time
    data, the lack of good analytics tools for messaging apps remains a
    major deterrent to adoption. The challenge is twofold: Strong
    analytics dashboards take time to build, and many messengers are
    privacy-centric by nature.

    The latter issue has led to an existential crisis for apps keen to
    remain true to their roots while also attracting brands and
    appeasing investors. To the far left, companies like WhatsApp and
    Telegram have made public promises to shun personal data collection
    and advertising. Closer to center, Snapchat and Kik collect basic
    information like age and location for ad targeting, but denounce
    “creepy,” hyper-targeted ads. Other platforms like Pinger seem more
    inclined to offer rich data collection and hyper-targeting of
    anonymized users. Specifically, Pinger leverages keyword data to let
    advertisers reach users based on their interests.

    Still, in a landscape increasingly driven by programmatic ambitions
    and data-centric decision making, chat apps currently deliver
    comparatively limited information in basic dashboards, or in some
    cases via analog reporting. Most are mobilizing to remedy the
    situation quickly, and a host of third party services are also
    beginning to create dashboard solutions based on the major apps'
    willingness to grant API access.

3.  **Growing Pains:** As messaging apps respond to the demands of
    spectacular growth, publisher partners we've spoken to have at times
    found it difficult to get consistent support or answers to questions
    about platform capabilities.

    Apps like Tango have also made large changes to their channel format
    for publishers— starting with a news feed that helped drive traffic
    to content, but transitioning to chat rooms geared toward
    discussion. While changes like this are understandable as part of a
    process for looking to find experiences that resonate with users,
    the volatility can be unsettling.

    Other platforms like WhatsApp currently have little interest
    altogether in providing tools for publishers. Their emphasis, for
    the time being, is purely on connecting users to friends and family.
    And while this may not technically qualify as a growing pain, it
    certainly poses logistical challenges for companies attempting to
    adapt the app to their needs.

Industry Opportunities
----------------------

1.  **Higher Engagement:** Since many chat apps provide publishers with
    push notifications or chatbot experiences (programmable robots that
    converse with users—see glossary), they can deliver significantly
    higher engagement rates than Facebook and Twitter. For example,
    LINE's Euro-Americas CEO Jeanie Han claims that 55.8 percent of push
    notifications sent to followers of official accounts are
    read.<sup><a href=#citations>6</a></sup> This advantage may erode from its current levels as
    new publishers compete for attention on each platform, but message
    open rates are still likely to supersede social network news feeds.

2.  **Audience Development:** With billions of active users across
    multiple major chat apps, publishers have been successful in
    building large audiences fairly quickly on several platforms.

3.  **A Chance to Connect With Users in a New Way:** Messaging apps
    offer a host of features not unavailable on social networks or other
    platforms. Publishers can creatively leverage these tools to tell
    stories in new ways. For example, Snapchat lets users write and draw
    on top of content from publishers before sharing with friends.
    Companies like BuzzFeed are also experimenting with
    publisher-branded emojis that followers use to enhance personal
    conversations on apps like LINE.

4.  **Building Community:** Chat apps offer an opportunity for readers
    and viewers to easily connect, share, collaborate, and discuss a
    range of topics. Platforms like Kik and Tango, for example, let
    companies host their own chat rooms where readers and viewers can
    meet and discuss topics of interest. And Snapchat's Live Stories
    allows people in a specific geolocation to contribute eyewitness
    media to a crowdsourced video piece the entire Snapchat community
    can view.

Key Players and Case Studies
============================

For publishers acting as early adopters, 2014 and 2015 has been a period
of great experimentation. In addition to learning the strengths and
weaknesses of various platforms, news organizations have also explored
different strategies for adapting their professional voice to an
ecosystem filled with emojis, stickers, games, memes, and more.

We've taken a look at some of the main messaging platforms and how news
organizations use them.

LINE: Japanese Chat App Spins Fun Visuals into Big Profits
----------------------------------------------------------

**Audience:** 211 million monthly, active users\
**Top Markets:** Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, Indonesia, Spain\
**Demographics:** Majority aged 16–34 years\
**Key Features:** Free to use; multimedia file-sharing capability; works
across all major mobile phone platforms and PCs; timeline news feed;
official brand accounts with CMS and one daily push alert limit;
stickers, coupons and games for free and paid.

LINE (the official trademark is capitalized) is a Japanese messaging app
initially created in response to the Tokyo earthquake in 2011 as a means
for employees of parent company NHN Japan to stay in touch. It was
released to the public later in the year and experienced significant
growth across the country and in the region, particularly in Thailand,
Taiwan, and Indonesia.

It stands out as the most profitable messaging app on the market, with a
recent App Annie report suggesting LINE as the most profitable of any
app in June 2015.<sup><a href=#citations>7</a></sup> This is in large part due to its hugely
popular games and stickers market, which drive roughly 60 percent and 20
percent of revenue, respectively. The company reported \$656 million
(JPY 86.3 billion) in gross revenue for 2014, far outpacing its
competitors.<sup><a href=#citations>8</a></sup>

LINE has official accounts for brands and publishers, offering them a
dedicated CMS browser to create and manage daily push alerts and content
on the account's home feed.

### BuzzFeed Builds LINE Audience with Push Notifications, Stickers, and Comics

BBC News and the *The Wall Street Journal* are among the news
organizations that have a million-plus subscribers to their LINE
accounts, experimenting on different content models around video (BBC)
and daily alerts and breaking news (*The Wall Street Journal*).
BuzzFeed, a more recent entrant to the platform, has taken a very
different approach.

Bryant Hua, associate social media editor at BuzzFeed, explained the
company's thinking:

> LINE is probably one of the most exciting messaging apps, because you
> can send global push messages, but there's also a feed on the home
> channel that you can publish to. We were more able to curate the
> channel in a BuzzFeed way. Comics are one of the big areas that we're
> pushing into—we have comics on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram—and this
> platform in particular seems to be a place where the audience is
> reacting well to them.

LINE has its own web browser-based CMS and provides the ability to
schedule posts, which makes managing the account much more efficient.

The BuzzFeed channel rarely links back to its main website, a similar
strategy that it employs on social media platforms, too. Hua added: “We
have a more distributed strategy in 2015 and we're not totally focused
on driving traffic back to the site, so we provide as much information
with the feed as possible.”

One of the most effective ways to attract new subscribers on the
platform (as is the case with several other chat apps) is by using
stickers. BuzzFeed debuted its own sticker set, enabling LINE users to
download them for free as long as they subscribed to the BuzzFeed
channel. This helped BuzzFeed to acquire a following of over 200,000
within a few months of launch.

LINE also allows users to interact with content using emojis. Instead of
clicking a “like” button, users can choose from a selection of six
different emojis to express how they feel about a story or piece of
content (Facebook began testing a similar approach called Reactions in
October).<sup><a href=#citations>9</a></sup> Interactive polls and a commenting system
also let users respond in text and with stickers, which Hua said is a
unique way that LINE engages with audiences. A recent feature asked
users to select the house from Harry Potter's Hogwarts which they most
fit into; it was one of BuzzFeed's most engaged posts since the channel
launched.

![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page15_BF2.png)
![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page15_BF3.png)

Hua openly admitted that hard news hasn't particularly worked on the
LINE channel—headline bulletins from the news apps team haven't
generated much engagement like they do on some other social media
channels.

The experience is in direct contrast with the LINE channels of BBC News
and *The Wall Street Journal*. Both of these accounts passed the
one-million-subscriber mark earlier this year. The difference in how
audiences engage with news on their channels, compared to that of
Buzzfeed's, is potentially attributable to subscribers' different
expectations from the brands, with Buzzfeed more typically offering
large slices of humor and viral memes alongside some news content.

WeChat: China's Tencent Reinvents the Web Portal for Mobile
-----------------------------------------------------------

**Audience:** 600 million monthly, active users\
**Top Markets:** China, Malaysia, Hong Kong, India, Taiwan\
**Demographics:** Majority of users aged 16–34 years\
**Key Features:** Connect to friends via nearby “radar”; “shake” phone
(see glossary for definition) and connect with whomever else is shaking
at that moment; enter walkie-talkie mode (see glossary for definition);
official brand platform with CMS; free and paid stickers and coupons;
share multimedia files; works on all major mobile platforms and PC/Macs.

Launched in 2011 as Weixin inside China, WeChat is the global version of
the chat app, owned by parent company Tencent. It has 600 million
monthly, active users,<sup><a href=#citations>10</a></sup> the vast majority of whom call
China home. While Tencent doesn't split out the figure for the number of
users WeChat hosts outside of China, we understand the figure is between
100 million and 150 million active users.

It is undoubtedly very appealing to try and reach a Chinese audience
through WeChat, and several news organizations have launched channels
inside the platform with this intent. However, it is important to stress
that WeChat and Weixin are separate entities. People inside China don't
have access to WeChat and foreign news publishers don't have access to
Weixin, unless they are able to pass a local registration process, which
is often prohibitive.

Nevertheless, WeChat does provide a means of reaching Chinese diaspora
outside the country—and those users can provide a route to reaching
people inside China through social connections and sharing. WeChat has
traditionally positioned its focus in Asia and Africa, with its recent
investment in Kik—a rival chat app founded in Canada—indicative of its
desire to gain a foothold in Western markets.

WeChat is probably one of the most sophisticated chat apps. In China, it
strategically offers itself as a one-stop-shop for everything a person
might want to do on a phone—from messaging and social networking, to
buying goods and services, to mobile banking. The app outside China
doesn't have all these features.

### Cliff Central Builds First Radio Channel on a Chat App

Gareth Cliff is a former South African radio talk show host turned
digital media entrepreneur. In 2014, he founded cliffcentral.com, which
aimed to merge online radio broadcasting with social media and instant
messaging platforms.<sup><a href=#citations>11</a></sup>

He partnered with WeChat, then at the early stages of establishing a
presence in Africa, to launch the world's first full radio and audio
channel inside a chat platform. Cliff noted:

> WeChat has been great to work with. We worked with them to develop an
> instant bespoke platform where users could stream our radio broadcasts
> live and listen to our podcasts on demand. We update the channel
> daily, with new podcasts and pictures. It gives our audience direct
> access to our presenters and DJs—we have our WeChat channel plugged in
> to our studio so we can respond to messages in real time on the air.

Cliff's shock-jock style remains part of the DNA of his digital radio
network and it seems to be a good fit for the medium, with the channel
currently boasting around 140,000 subscribers. It requires a daily
production effort to keep it updated, with additional attention to the
automated audio streams pulled into the channel. The platform is
optimized to take into account that many potential users may have
limited data plans: it offers both low- and high-resolution audio
streams.

“Being a digital-only operation, we're able to turn on a dime and be
agile in our strategy. You need to be able to pull in an audience across
all these digital platforms, and so it ultimately comes down to your
content,” Cliff said.

One of the most exciting aspects of the project for him is the potential
for commercial revenue in the future: “We're still at the early stages,
but I can see a time when we could add click-to-buy functionality, as
well as offer sponsorship and advertising opportunities for the
channel.”

As many radio stations around the world look toward their digital
futures, the pioneering work of Cliff Central on WeChat is a fine
example of how messaging platforms can help the radio industry.

Kik: Messaging App for Teens Goes All-In on A.I. Chatbots
---------------------------------------------------------

**Audience:** 80 million estimated monthly, active users\
**Top Markets:** North America\
**Key Demographics:** 82 percent of users are aged 13–24\
**Key Features:** Chatbots, web browser, texting, stickers and emojis,
games.

When Kik's 27-year-old CEO Ted Livingston declared his intention to be
“The WeChat of the West” in a November 2014 blog post,<sup><a href=#citations>12</a></sup> it
was more than a casual nod to influences. By mid-2015, Livingston was in
business with WeChat's parent company Tencent, taking a \$50-million
investment and enlisting the Chinese tech giant's help in replicating
its success outside of Asia. The union also signaled WeChat's
recognition that buying a piece of a successful North American messaging
app was a better bet than continuing with an expensive and fruitless
attempt to break into the U.S. market.

Founded in Waterloo, Canada, in 2009, Kik went viral with one key,
differentiating feature: Users don't need to provide their mobile number
to open an account. This anonymity led to mass adoption from people
looking to connect with not only friends and family, but also with
strangers they meet online or within the app itself. Kik positions
itself as a mobile browser for the web, allowing users to access and
share content and websites, or build custom HTML5 experiences that can
be viewed and shared within the app.

Claiming on its website that 40 percent of U.S. teens and young adults
has installed the app, Kik has enticed news organization eager to reach
a young North American audience.<sup><a href=#citations>13</a></sup> As of November 2014,
publishers could leverage Promoted Chats—an A.I.-powered technology that
*The Wall Street Journal* dubbed “the dawn of
'chatvertising”'<sup><a href=#citations>14</a></sup>—the premise of which is that users have
one-to-one text conversations with a bot programmed with scripted
answers based on keyword recognition.

Dozens of companies like BuzzFeed, The Huffington Post, VICE, Comedy
Central, MTV, Spotify, Funny or Die, Nike, NBC News, and *The Washington
Post* have tried their hand at Promoted Chats, typically paying \$0.20
to \$0.30 for each “chatter” that opts in to speak to them. Companies
can send four push notifications per month to their entire chatter
audience, and Kik claims 50 percent of brand push notifications are read
within one hour of delivery. Publishers can also prominently feature
their website or custom Kik web app link within Promoted Chat, which
opens in the Kik browser.

### Care to Speak to *The Washington Post* Chatbot?


![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page19_Kik2.png)

Some organizations share articles to drive traffic to their website,
while others, like *The Washington Post*, favor engaging users through
games, quizzes, and chat adventures that live within Kik and have little
to do with current events. At its launch on the platform, The Post
introduced “Kiktionary,” in which users are shown a partial illustration
of a political figure and have the option to guess who it is, or type
“GIVEUP,” “SEEMORE,” or “ENDGAME.”

On a second occasion, *The Washington Post* sent a push notification
stating, “Trivia time! Want to LEARN or PLAY?” to lead users into a quiz
highlighting Hillary Clinton's status as a Grammy winner. The most
successful Washington Post conversation starter asked users to take a
virtual road trip to a destination of their choice.

Ryan Kellett, *The Washington Post*'s director of audience growth, said:

> I'd keep in mind that we are still developing what our strategy should
> be. We aim to design experiences that are surprising and useful, which
> means pushing the platform (and in this case, the bot) to its
> limits…We do read through some of our individual user conversations.
> It helps us get a sense of where we might be missing something in
> designing the bot experience.

When you see the words “Washington Post is typing…” as you await a
chatbot response, it should be clear to users that they're befriending a
robot. And in less than a year, 16 million Kik users have chosen to do
just that, exchanging half a billion messages with Promoted Chat
accounts.

Kik actively plans to greatly expand the capabilities of bots. “We
believe chat will become the dominant interface that connects the
digital and real worlds through more sophisticated A.I. executions like
bots,” said Paul Gray, Kik's director of platform services. “We're only
at the tip of the iceberg.”

For its part, *The Washington Post* remains cautiously optimistic. “Chat
apps including Kik have incredible potential, and we're just starting to
play in those spaces,” said Kellert. “But it's too soon to tell where
they'd rank in terms of platform importance.”

WhatsApp: The No-Frills Messaging App
-------------------------------------

**Audience:** 900 million monthly, active users\
**Top Markets:** India, South Africa, Malaysia, Spain, Mexico\
**Demographics:** Broad age range, not limited to those aged 16–34\
**Key Features:** Free messaging for the first year, then an annual
subscription of \$1; free WhatsApp calls; WhatsApp web interface; voice
memos, as well as audio, image, and video files; groups and broadcast
lists.

In early September of 2015, co-founder of WhatsApp Jan Koum announced
that the company had passed the 900 million mark for monthly, active
users.<sup><a href=#citations>15</a></sup>

The platform is likely to break the one billion active users mark by the
end of 2015 or soon afterward.

While it may not be the dominant chat app in the United States, WhatsApp
rules across many parts of the world as the number one downloaded app of
any kind (let alone chat app). One of the key reasons for its dramatic,
global uptake is the free alternative it provides to expensive SMS
charges that exist in many parts of the world. In addition to text
messages, it can also facilitate voice memos, images, and video
clips—and, most recently, Internet calls.

Another big factor in its huge, global success is the simplicity of the
app itself. Once downloaded, it scans a user's address book and
immediately lets him or her communicate with any personal contacts
already on WhatsApp. It doesn't require the creation of a username or
password—an impediment which remains a significant barrier to entry for
many people in emerging markets when it comes to other apps and social
media platforms.

While many instant messaging platforms tend to skew toward a younger
demographic of users, Whatsapp has a much broader appeal globally.

### BBC News Using WhatsApp for Newsgathering

BBC News was the first to experiment with editorial content on WhatsApp
in 2014, most notably with its Ebola WhatsApp “lifeline” information
service targeting those in West Africa.<sup><a href=#citations>16</a></sup>

However, WhatsApp is not engineered to work efficiently as a mass-push
distribution service, and much of BBC News's more recent strategy on the
platform has focused on audience engagement through user-generated
content and newsgathering.

Early in 2015, the UGC and Social Media Hub, situated in the heart of
the BBC's global newsroom, set up a central WhatsApp number and
encouraged news audiences across online, TV, and radio to use it as a
means to share their content with the newsroom.<sup><a href=#citations>17</a></sup>

Soon after launching the account, it quickly proved its value: “For us,
WhatsApp has proved a key way to get in touch with people in areas where
other forms of communication just don't work, so it was naturally the
source we turned to following the earthquakes in Nepal,” said Natalie
Miller, a senior journalist at the UGC Hub.

Miller explained why WhatsApp became the primary communication tool for
many in Nepal at the time of the earthquake:

> Phone lines were down in the affected areas and we can be waiting a
> long time for an email to be received and answered, whereas WhatsApp
> is quick and allows people to share their views, pictures, and videos
> with us all via the same channel. In some cases WhatsApp allows us to
> speak to people who just don't feel safe talking on the phone.

Miller also explained that directly verifying content when people submit
it is a much quicker process inside WhatsApp—as all inbound
communication comes with a mobile number attached to it. “On other
social media channels, it can take some time for us to message people
and get a response,” she said. “With WhatsApp it's often instant as they
see our message popping up immediately on their phone. If we need to
follow up with a call, we have their mobile number and so this speeds up
the process considerably.”

The launch of WhatsApp Web,<sup><a href=#citations>18</a></sup> which allows the app on a
user's phone to pair with a computer screen, has helped the UGC Hub
manage incoming content much more effectively, too. Miller recommended
using an Android handset, as it is easier to transfer the media content
coming in via the subfolder menus on the Android platform via a USB
cable onto a computer; iPhones don't have the same ability. “We normally
assign one of our producers each day to manage the WhatsApp account in
addition to their other duties. The web interface means they can keep an
eye on any incoming content, respond to any messages, and also continue
to do other work on their computers,” Miller added.

“In the case of the second earthquake in Nepal, we received almost 50
WhatsApp messages, including pictures and videos from within the country
and dozens more from elsewhere talking about the quake,” she said. “It
became the main source of content for the live news blog on the BBC News
website that day.”

The team also produced a separate story on the website detailing the
experiences of those affected on the ground.<sup><a href=#citations>19</a></sup>

The potential for using WhatsApp is clearly significant for the BBC. In
addition to the UCG Hub, a number of its news programs have set up their
own accounts to solicit audience opinion and contributions. Several of
its language services also use WhatsApp to source material around major
stories. However, this broad type of use remains relatively limited
among other news organizations—particularly those with global
audiences—and is likely to be an area of increasing focus in the coming
months.

Snapchat: The New Home of Sexting…and CNN
-----------------------------------------

**Audience:** 100 million daily, active users globally\
**Top Markets:** North America, Europe\
**Key Demographics:** 13–34-year-olds\
**Key Features:** Disappearing messages, Discover, crowdsourced Live
Story montages, My Story daily montages, QR codes, location-based
geofilters, Snapcash peer-to-peer payments.

Founded in 2011 and initially synonymous with sexting,<sup><a href=#citations>20</a></sup>
Snapchat rapidly evolved into a mainstream global phenomenon by
introducing ephemeral messaging to teens and college students. While
Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook present a more coiffed and manicured
version of users' personas, Snapchat has become an outlet for people and
publishers to provide a raw, behind-the-scenes glimpse into their day.

My Story is the tool available to most publishers and compiles a
chronological montage of your snaps from the last day, with each snap
disappearing after 24 hours. It looks and feels like one-to-one snaps
from a friend, but is viewable by any user that follows your account.
All content must be shot live with your phone, lending a rawness and
immediacy to the end result. You can also text, draw, or place emojis of
any size on top of your snaps.

### *The New York Times* Embraces the Selfie

In a blog post, *The New York Times*'s social editor Talya Minsberg
admitted that “envisioning what *The New York Times* could look like on
Snapchat was tricky.<sup><a href=#citations>21</a></sup> How could a traditional media company
fit into a medium known for bad selfies?”

*The Times* has primarily experimented with My Stories as a new way to
cover live events, with a variety of staff journalists helming the
account for stretches of time. Pieces regularly juxtapose selfie
standups from reporters with footage of the occasion. In some instances
this includes long-form interviews with public figures, such as when
Laverne Cox gave *The Times* an interview exclusively on Snapchat as a
lead-up to her TimesTalks event, which was also covered in the My Story.
Other events have included the Met Gala, Fashion Week, the AfroPunk
Festival, and the Pope's visit to New York.

“The best Snapchat stories generally are ones that tell a narrative in a
personal, visual way that pulls in and keeps the viewer,” wrote
Minsberg, who went on to quote her colleague, news assistant and web
producer Valeriya Safronova:

> What's great about Snapchat is that it's a casual and playful medium.
> Images have short life spans and viewers look through them very
> quickly, so there's no need to carefully stage a photo or video.
> Candid moments are prized above staged shots.

When it comes to measuring My Story success, publishers have access to
fairly limited information, viewable only on mobile. During the lifespan
of a 24-hour My Story, they can see how many people watched each snap,
which also lets them deduce drop-off. Publishers can view the number of
users that took a screenshot of their story and can access a list of
people that have added their account. For those looking to bolster their
followings, Snapchat also allows for the creation of a custom QR code
that users scan within the app to automatically follow an account.

### CNN Courts Millennials With Bespoke Daily Content on Snapchat Discover

Snapchat launched its Discover platform in early
2015.<sup><a href=#citations>22</a></sup> As one of the most eagerly anticipated product
launches for some time in the media industry, excitement was matched in
equal measure by curiosity and skepticism about the app's new
section—devoted to channels curated by a small group of launch partners.

In his “Introducing Discover” blog post, CEO Evan Spiegel took social
networks to task for the rise of clickbait culture:

> This is not social media. Social media companies tell us what to read
> based on what's most recent or most popular. We see it differently. We
> count on editors and artists, not clicks and shares, to determine
> what's important.<sup><a href=#citations>23</a></sup>

Snapchat claims to have 100 million daily users, and a Snapchat
represenative said that in the first 30 days after a design change made
Discover easier to navigate, 50 million users visited the section
specifically.<sup><a href=#citations>24</a></sup>

There have been suggestions that traffic to Discover has fallen since
its initial launch. However, partners with whom we spoke claim to have
noticed a marked increase since the section was made more visible to
users in July of 2015. BuzzFeed's CEO Jonah Peretti stated in September
that 21 percent of all BuzzFeed content views now come from Snapchat
Discover.<sup><a href=#citations>25</a></sup> *Cosmopolitan* announced similarly high
numbers for its Discover page—roughly 3 million daily readers and up to
1.2 million daily content shares.<sup><a href=#citations>26</a></sup> Those are likely among
the highest-performing partners, as others we spoke to, who were not
able to provide figures publicly, told us they are seeing in the range
of 500,000–700,000 daily users.

Among Discover's high-profile launch partners was CNN. Samantha Barry,
head of social media and senior director of strategy at CNN, worked with
a small team for several months to get the outlet's proposition for the
platform ready ahead of going live in January of 2015. She told us in an
August 2015 interview:

It brought together people from editorial, design, and product—three
parts of the organization that don't necessarily always work that
closely together. We effectively formed a small startup operation and
tried to figure out how do we tell stories on a platform that is truly
native and bespoke to it? It was a new way of storytelling that we had
to understand.

A team of four, including two designers and two producers, now works
full time on CNN's Snapchat channel. In addition, the product team
provides support as and when required. All the content is made to order,
partly to suit the vertical screen experience for users inside the app.

Barry said the CNN Snapchat channel has evolved significantly since its
initial inception, as its team has performed constant iterations based
on audience feedback and after measuring engagement on a range of
content.

The Discover section offers a very different environment from the
“regular” Snapchat experience, and media organizations generally handle
it uniquely from standard social media accounts. Discover is more like a
magazine made for the millennial mobile generation, said Barry: “In some
ways it's a throwback to old media. The user chooses to go in; we curate
the content they see in the same way as a newspaper did. They experience
it in much the same way as a traditional TV schedule.”

So how does Barry measure success? While she couldn't reveal numbers,
she said the audience figures have been beyond what she could have hoped
for. Based on the data Snapchat can provide, CNN is able to measure
average time viewed, conversion rates, and shares.

And what content has worked the best? To date, CNN has published more
than 1,000 stories on Discover. Light stories and treatments are
certainly part of the mix, but despite what many might assume, serious
stories have also performed remarkably well.

Barry listed several examples:

> “Raising Ryland,” a 12-minute short documentary on a 5-year-old who is
> transgender; features on race relations and gender equality; a special
> Discover edition focusing on the poor children of Silicon Valley; and
> “Hunting Ground,” a series that tackled the issue of campus rape.

“Don't assume they know the background to the story” is one golden rule
that Barry's team follows when creating content.

Though Snapchat Discover doesn't allow links or any means for taking
users back to CNN's website, Barry has seen evidence that Snapchat users
do visit CNN's main TV channel as a result of Discover: “We've come
across examples where parents get called by their kids to TiVo a
particular CNN documentary because they have seen it trailed on our
Discover channel,” she said.

### Snapchat's Peter Hamby Delivers Crowdsourced News and Selfie-Standups


![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page29_Iran2.png)

In June 2014, Snapchat launched Live Stories, a game-changing product
that crowdsources snaps from major events into curated,
mini-documentaries visible to the broader Snapchat community. Users in a
particular geolocation see an option to submit their posts to Live
Story, and the Snapchat team then creates a montage highlighting various
vantage points and experiences.

The most popular Live Story to date featured Snapchatters' experience of
a storm dubbed “Snowpocalypse.” At roughly 200 seconds in length, the
clip was viewed 24.79 million times in a 24-hour period, a viewership
that outpaces the most popular network TV shows. Over time, Snapchat
introduced stories like “Holi in India” and “Namibia” that give glimpses
into the cultures and traditions of cities and countries many users knew
little about.

From a newsroom perspective, Live Stories took an interesting turn when
Snapchat hired news veteran Peter Hamby away from CNN in April of 2015.
With the U.S. 2016 election cycle moving into full swing, Snapchat began
inserting Hamby standups into crowdsourced election stories to give
users context for major events like GOP debates.

“The people that are on Snapchat right now are folks who…aren't getting
news and information in traditional ways…they're not watching TV, cable
news, reading newspapers,” said Hamby in a podcast for KUT News and *The
Texas Tribune*. “It's a hard-to-reach, young but still smart audience,
and my job this election is to…educate and demystify the process for an
audience of a hundred million Snapchat users who might be coming to the
campaign for the first time.”<sup><a href=#citations>27</a></sup>

Stories also began to feature educational overlays with illustrations of
politicians and brief descriptions of their keys positions on the
issues.

In a story covering debate over the Iran nuclear deal, Snapchat broke
down the key players on both sides of the aisle for a likely audience of
millions.

Hamby pointed out that young Snapchatters took to Twitter to announce
that they hadn't known the ins and outs of the Iran nuclear debate
before learning about it on Snapchat.<sup><a href=#citations>28</a></sup>

![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page30_Tweet1.png)
![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page30_Tweet2.png)
![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page30_Tweet3.png)

There are, of course, users who are less enthused to see Snapchat delve
into politics.

![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page30_Tweet4.png)

In other instances, Snapchat has enlisted the major politicians
themselves as UGC contributors, offering users a behind-the-scenes look
at Hillary Clinton in her car or Arnold Schwarzenegger en route to an
event. In a particularly memorable moment, Democratic hopeful Bernie
Sanders addressed the Snapchat audience with a friendly “Hello,
Snapshot!”

While it's hard to assess the scope of Snapchat's newsroom ambitions, it
clearly sees itself less as a social media platform than as a video and
media company with social layers. In his KUT interview, Hamby
enthusiastically described the difference between network news coverage
and Snapchat's crowdsource-and-curate approach:

> When I was at CNN we would cover an event with a couple of
> cameras…with the live story we can cover an event from many different
> perspectives with everybody's camera, in some cases thousands of
> cameras—and that's really powerful.<sup><a href=#citations>29</a></sup>

Viber: Free Calls Conquer the Globe
-----------------------------------

**Audience:** 250 million monthly, active users\
**Top Markets:** Russia, India, Iran, Australia, Middle East\
**Demographics:** Majority of users aged 25–35\
**Key Features:** Public Chats, texting, phone and video calls,
stickers, games, service messages.

Founded in late 2010 by a team of two Israelis and two Belarusians,
Viber is a formidable competitor to Skype that initially offered free
calls and texting on the mobile web. By September 2015, the app hit 250
million monthly, active users, boasting strongholds on multiple
continents and an expanded suite of features like stickers and games.

Publishers joined the conversation in November 2014 with the launch of
Public Chats, a format whose name accurately describes its
functionality. News organizations on the platform generally utilize
Viber to broadcast text-based group discussions between their team
members to the web in real time.

For the community, Public Chats is a spectator sport without the ability
to post comments, but users can click heart icons next to individual
chat moments to express their excitement. For publishers, each
individual chat participant can easily share photos, video, stickers,
and links from mobile or desktop. It's also a completely painless
process to add or remove participants as you go.

### HuffPost Entertainment Team Lets Loose on Public Chats

For all of Viber's charm, it can reveal a palpable self-consciousness as
journalists trained to write articles or post to Twitter are asked to
text message publicly. But, as HuffPost Entertainment proves, with the
right mix of uninhibited colleagues truly letting loose in conversation,
the results can be engaging and entertaining in a way that creates a
heightened degree of intimacy between reporters and their audiences.

Lauren Zupkus, social media editor at HuffPost Entertainment, admitted
that her initial reaction to the platform was, “Who the hell is gonna
care what I have to say?” But to her surprise, 10,000 “Vibers” signed up
to watch her team discuss Kylie Jenner and Game of Thrones, or debate
the merits of fall compared to summer. “We're not striving to cram
HuffPo articles down people's throats. I think the weakest thing you can
do on social media as a brand is try too hard…I think it's cool that we
can be ourselves,” she said.


![image](graphics/CHATAPPS_Page33_Viber.png)

Each day the HuffPo Entertainment team has a private chat to determine
the topics for the day's public one, though they never script
conversation. Zupkas described the entire process as something you do
“in free moments,” making it less resource-intensive than Snapchat My
Story posts. The team has also started promoting its Public Chat by
closing articles with the statement, “For a constant stream of
entertainment news and discussion, follow HuffPost Entertainment on
Viber.”

Viber's head of North America Scott Nelson confirmed that HuffPost's
consistent activity yields the strongest results:

> While it doesn't need to be a constant flow of minute-by-minute
> information, the most successful chats update daily. Not only does
> this keep the content fresh and engaging, it also ensures that their
> chat stays at the top of the listings in users' phones, keeping them
> front of mind.

Other publishers on the platform include BuzzFeed; GMA News; Mashable;
and BBC Nepali, which leveraged the app to deliver alerts to a large
audience in the country during the recent earthquake crisis.

Telegram: Chat Encryption for the Masses
----------------------------------------

**Audience:** 62 million monthly, active users\
**Top Markets:** Iran, India, Iraq, Uzbekistan, Spain\
**Demographics:** Users with high privacy concerns, often in countries
where government monitoring and security is a concern\
**Key Features:** Channels allowing broadcasts access to an unlimited
number of users; open source code and bot API; seamless syncing across
mobiles, tablets, and PCs; ability to send multiple file types,
including docs, MP3s, video, images, and compressed files of up to 1.5
gigabytes.

Telegram is a messaging app that focuses on speed and security. Its
creators, brothers Nikolai and Pavel Durov, also founded the Russian
social network VK. Telegram shares more similarities with WhatsApp than
the Asian chat apps WeChat and LINE.

There are a couple of significant areas, through, in which it's
distinct: The company prides itself in building what it describes as a
highly secure app. It also has a completely open source code and API,
allowing developers freedom to create their own versions of the app or
build additional services on top of it.

Most recently Telegram announced the launch of
channels,<sup><a href=#citations>30</a></sup> which are broadcast lists similar to those
found in WhatsApp but without the limitations on the number of contacts
that can be added. This has been a major difficulty for many news
organizations trying to run push-news services on WhatsApp, wherein the
256 broadcast-list limit makes any initiative very labor intensive and
difficult to scale. In contrast, Telegram has a full desktop version and
the same account can be managed from multiple devices at the same time,
rendering the ability to scale broadcast activity considerably easier.

Another innovation in the messaging space that Telegram spearheaded is
the launch of the Telegram Bots API,<sup><a href=#citations>31</a></sup> which allows
developers to build custom services inside the app, link with external
platforms, and “do almost anything.”

A number of Russian news organizations have already started
experimenting with the API, creating their own news bots.

The launch of bots has likely played a big part in the huge increase of
daily messages inside the app. At a TechCrunch Disrupt event in
September 2015,<sup><a href=#citations>32</a></sup> Pavel Durov reported that the number of
daily messages exchanged on Telegram had risen from one billion in
February to 12 billion in September, a staggering increase in just seven
months. The number of monthly, active users—currently around 62
million—hasn't grown as quickly, so the increase in messages clearly
suggests a big jump in activity among the app's existing user base.

It's probably not surprising that the secure nature of the app promotes
a big uptake in areas where government monitoring and security is an
issue. It has been the most frequently downloaded app in countries like
Uzbekistan and Iran, just as it has courted controversy as the messaging
app of choice for the Islamic State—an issue Durov also addressed at
TechCrunch Disrupt: “I think that privacy, ultimately, and our right for
privacy is more important than our fear of bad things happening, like
terrorism.”

BBC World Service, which runs news operations in 28 languages, has been
the first international news organization to take advantage of
Telegram's popularity in certain regions of the world. Its Persian
Service recently launched a channel that acquired 80,000 direct
subscribers within its first week, with some posts reaching as many as
320,000 users. Jacqui Maher, an interactive journalist at the BBC's News
Labs, has been working on Telegram's bots platform to develop services
to reach people in countries where the BBC is blocked:

> Being encrypted but also open source, it's understandable why Telegram
> is proving to be popular in countries like Iran and Uzbekistan. The
> code we've been working from Telegram has so far proven to be very
> stable and easy to use. It's allowing us to open up secure news
> services in parts of the world we haven't been able to access before.

Conclusion
==========

Trends Underlying the Popularity of Chat Apps
---------------------------------------------

In addition to cost-cutting, the rise of messaging apps indicates
several key trends:

1.  **An appetite for one-to-one or small group communication:** Social
    networks act primarily as broadcast tools built around news feeds
    filled with friends, family, and acquaintances. In contrast,
    messengers allow people to talk privately with the people they most
    care about.

2.  **A turn toward privacy:** A recent Frank N. Magid Associates survey
    of U.S. teens found that only 9 percent describe Facebook as “safe”
    or “trustworthy.”<sup><a href=#citations>33</a></sup> Many CEOs of major messaging apps
    take a similar stance, eschewing the collection of personal
    information and building platforms free of hyper-targeted
    advertising. Chat apps may also feel “trustworthy” to young users by
    offering a reprieve from the watchful eye of parents and employers
    that have infiltrated traditional social networks.

What's the Opportunity?
-----------------------

In the short time since early 2014, when the BBC became the first major
news organization to conduct editorial experiments on messaging
platforms, the landscape has changed significantly. Facebook bought
WhatsApp for a staggering \$22 billion. Snapchat is now a media
powerhouse, turning away countless news publishers desperate to place
their content within the app. Today, dozens of news organizations are on
Viber, WeChat, WhatsApp, Kik, LINE, and Tango, to name just a few.

However, as Samir Mezrahi, senior editor of BuzzFeed, pointed out to us
during our research, it is important to remember that these platforms
are still in their infancy. They are, in most cases, longer-term bets,
rather than ones that will bear immediate fruit if referrals and
audience reach are the expectations.

If anything, the next 18 months to two years will see even faster change
as the relationship between messaging platforms and news organizations
deepens.

Through the course of our research for this report, we have seen a
number of use cases which highlight opportunities for news organizations
to develop a presence on these platforms.

### Accelerating learning and content innovation on mobile phones

All the people with whom we spoke who were experimenting on messaging
platforms shared one common experience: They have deepened their
experience and skillset around what makes great content for mobile
devices in a way they wouldn't have been able to do as quickly by using
their own platforms alone. Whether it is developing production
techniques for portrait videos on Snapchat, understanding the UX of chat
bots on LINE or Kik, or using emojis on WhatsApp to interact with
audiences, these apps have effectively become live, sandbox environments
where new ways of telling stories and experimenting with interactive
formats can be tested for instant feedback from users. What ends up
working well can then be brought back to official apps and home
websites.

### Connecting with hard-to-reach youth audiences

Millennial audiences are a tough demographic to crack, but several of
the messaging platforms covered in this report enjoy significant reach
with them. Snapchat and Kik are already well established, but newer
players (see below in predictions) are also emerging. Younger audiences
globally in a number of regions are already ahead of the curve compared
to their Western counterparts, using apps like WeChat and LINE to the
utmost of their functionality.

### Using WhatsApp as a UGC and newsgathering tool

BBC News has already seen great success in its newsroom and on several
of its radio and TV programs after encouraging audiences to send in
their content via WhatsApp. While the app doesn't have the same
penetration in the United States as it does in many other parts of the
world, it is still a great potential platform for tapping into diaspora
and minority communities that are likely to use it disproportionately
more to stay in touch with friends and family in other countries

What's on the Horizon?
----------------------

Predictions are always prone to inevitable ridicule and failure, but
there are some we think are worth making.

### The functionality of the platforms will mature

A consistent complaint from many of the news organizations that emerged
during the research phase of this report was the lack of in-depth
analytics and insights messaging platforms offer. As more have entered
this space, the chorus of common requests to these companies has risen:
how can we measure reach, time spent on individual items of content,
plays of audio and video files, clicks on links, open rates, and the
most popular content?

While a number of chat apps have their own Content Management Systems,
they are still quite basic and lack many features that make it easy to
create engaging content for the platform. Some, like WeChat and
Telegram, have good APIs, but others, like LINE, Viber, Snapchat, and
WhatsApp, don't. This makes it currently difficult for centralized
social media publishing tools to incorporate chat apps into their
systems.

Having spoken to many of the messaging companies, we know they are
working on improving these audience measurements and are thinking
pointedly about what do with their APIs. The ones that move the fastest
on these are likely to see the most investment in time and attention
from publishers.

### New ways of telling stories on mobile will emerge

As Samantha Barry of CNN told us, messaging platforms are driving news
organizations to think about new ways for creating content. It's fair to
say that Snapchat Discover has given rocket boosters to the rise of
vertical video—it is now a clear and present danger for any news
organization that isn't developing in-house capability and experience
working with the format, regardless of whether it's on Snapchat or not.

Apps like Yo, which allows users to send a simple “Yo” message with an
accompanying sound to their friends (and nothing more), may appear
fairly pointless at first glance. However, the application has a wide
range of official brand accounts, which are able to send links and
images to subscribers. As a result, Yo is actually proving to be a
valuable tool for news organizations' increased understanding of the
power of push notifications. The platform asks official accounts authors
to think very carefully about the user's expectation when receiving a Yo
alert from a brand at a particular time of day.

Similarly, the rise of emojis and stickers is allowing news
organizations to engage with audiences in more informal—and perhaps
meaningful—ways.

Following its various forays into chat apps, there is an informal “Emoji
Think Tank” already in existence at the BBC, where ideas for integrating
emojis, cartoons, and illustrations both onsite and offsite are part of
regular discussion (these conversations can be viewed via the Twitter
hashtag \#emojithinktank).

How long will the use of emojis and stickers remain off-site activities?
Could we start seeing the first integrations of them into news apps? The
BuzzFeed News App has clearly already heeded some lessons from messaging
platforms in this regard.

More innovative functionality on chat apps is coming, and with it will
emerge opportunities for creating new ways of telling stories.

### The growing importance of security, circumvention, and data restrictions

As government snooping, personal privacy, and security become issues for
many people globally, those living in countries where these are
particular concerns will increasingly look for platforms that enable
them to both communicate securely and receive accurate information,
unfiltered by government censors.

Telegram is likely to become a major player in this space, combining its
promise for greater security with a great set of production tools and
open APIs.

Another company that should make great strides here is Open Garden,
which created FireChat. Less than two years old, the platform grabbed
headlines during the Hong Kong protests of 2014 as hundreds of thousands
of people downloaded the app to bypass the state shut down of mobile
networks and social media sites.

FireChat uses the Bluetooth connectivity and radio aerials on feature
phones and smartphones to create a “mesh” network of people in the same
area. Opposite to mobile networks, the FireChat network gets stronger
and more resilient as more people join it. FireChat founder Micha
Benoliel told us that it would take only 5 percent of a city's
population on the app to create a complete network across the city—one
that operates completely off-grid, independent of mobile or data
networks.

The potential of such technology to combat state-sanctioned blocks on
networks, or failures during emergencies and natural disasters, is
obvious. FireChat has now moved beyond its proof-of-concept phase and
started serious development around its infrastructure and functionality.
It recently announced private direct messaging, a feature that many
people requested as previously all posts were publicly viewable.

Anonymity and privacy aren't just concerns for people living in
countries where government monitoring is a known issue. They are equally
significant factors that are attracting millennial users to similar
messaging platforms in the West. Yik Yak is one app that has risen
quickly in popularity on and around university campuses, as it uses
anonymous messaging technology based on location similar to FireChat's.
Political journalists reporting from presidential-candidate stump
speeches on university campuses have already found monitoring its
backchannel of conversation and opinion quite useful. Most recently, Yik
Yak collaborated with a news organization for the first time, as it
worked with BBC News to crowdsource opinions from Canadian users on the
country's recent general election campaign.<sup><a href=#citations>34</a></sup>

Jott is an app that is equally gaining wide adoption among junior high
and high schoolers in the United States. Again, using technology similar
to Firechat, the application lets users chat with each other by using
the Bluetooth function of their phones to connect—eliminating the need
for data or text messaging plans. We expect both Yik Yak and Jott to
continue to grow quickly; both are platforms news organizations wishing
to better understand younger audiences should watch.

### The emergence of regionalized and local messaging-app ecosystems

While many of the apps we've covered in this report have significant
coverage globally, or among specific regions and demographics, yet
another breed of chat apps is emerging.

Hike is an app you've probably never heard of, but it's already second
only to WhatsApp in the chat sphere in India. It is one of an increasing
number of messaging platforms that are entirely focused on growing in
their home markets. While Hike is aware that it won't likely overtake a
giant like WhatsApp in India, the platform has recognized that there is
still plenty of room to grow into second place by rapidly iterating its
service based on local users' needs and cultural identities.

Zalo is an app that is currently huge in Vietnam. Similar to Hike, it
has shaped itself around the cultural interests and requirements of
people in the country, offering a more tailored experience that has
prompted millions of natives to add it to their phones.

There is evidence of similar growth within the localized app market in
Africa and South America. These will be important platforms to watch as
news organizations seek to gain global audiences.

### The giants are coming

We haven't covered Facebook Messenger or Skype in this report. That's
because neither platform has developed serious capabilities for news
organizations to reach audiences and distribute content. We expect this
to change, though—and when it does, both could became major (maybe even
dominant) players in a very short time.

As a standalone app, Facebook Messenger has been around for just under
two years. Already, it has 700 million active users. Though many were
forced into downloading the app as it spun out from the main Facebook
platform, by some measures it could be described as the fastest-adopted
technology in history. In March of 2015, Facebook Messenger released its
API.<sup><a href=#citations>35</a></sup> It is now possible for developers to build
services inside the app, creating mini-apps for download inside
Messenger. Facebook's strategy with Messenger seems to mimic some of the
Asian chat apps with similar functionality: It already has stickers,
games are coming, and one of its primary goals is to develop business
and commerce capabilities. While Facebook hasn't announced any plans for
opening Messenger to news publishers, it may not be long before use
cases emerge, complementing traditional brand page accounts on the main
social media platform.

Skype, along with BlackBerry Messenger, is in many ways the grandparent
of messaging. However, while other chat platforms grew rapidly and
attracted lots of interest from publishers, Skype has largely remained
an onlooker—until now. From conversations we had with some publishers
and those working with the company, we believe this will change. If
Skype can develop a means for news organizations to grow audiences
inside the platform, distribute content to them, and interact, this
could represent one of the most significant shifts in this space.

We have already covered WhatsApp in this report, but it holds the keys
to another game changer, should it wish to use them: launching its own
API. We know of several vendors that currently pull an unofficial API
from WhatsApp and offer a custom CMS that allows for pushing WhatsApp
messages to users. However, these all break WhatsApp's Terms of Service,
and news organizations that use them run the risk of having their
accounts disabled—as we know has already happened in a couple of cases.
An official WhatsApp API release could spawn an entirely new industry of
startups, in much the same way that the release of Twitter's API did.
Except this time, it could be even bigger, given WhatsApp's near-billion
account user base.

### The robots are coming, too

While no news organization has leveraged robust artificial intelligence
to power a messaging app experience, there are strong indications that
A.I. will grow in force and ubiquity across chat apps. In particular,
Microsoft designed a text-based chatbot nicknamed Xiaoice in China that
many describe as a real-life version of Spike Jones's popular film Her
(in which the lead character literally falls in love with his operating
system).

The Xaioice program uses machine learning—scouring the Chinese Internet
to study how humans converse so it's constantly improving its skills—and
can remember personal anecdotes users share. For example, Xiaoice may
ask if you're feeling better about a breakup you mentioned in a previous
conversation with her (yes, the chatbot has a gender).

Users in China can access the experience on WeChat (Weixin in China), as
well as through other sites like microblogging service Weibo. According
to Microsoft, Xiaoice now has over 20 million registered users, with the
average user talking to her more than 60 times per month.<sup><a href=#citations>36</a></sup>

Other companies like IBM, a pioneer in machine learning that introduced
the Watson system, may also be poised to play a role in the messaging
landscape if demand for A.I.-powered chat grows. Facebook, too, recently
launched a beta of a personal chatbot assistant named M, which is
powered by a combination of A.I. and humans working behind the scenes. M
can book reservations for you, buy products online, and retrieve
information you need—all through a chat interface. When one considers
that publishers like *The Washington Post* are already deploying simple
chatbots on apps like Kik, why wouldn't they deploy advanced bots,
equipped with machine learning, when the technology is widely available?

### Messaging will become like electricity

While messaging is currently a clearly defined function of specific
apps, the future is likely to be one wherein the capability is baked-in
to nearly all digital technologies and services. The point where a
messaging app begins and ends will begin to blur. Already, app
classification is getting trickier, especially as social media platforms
such as Twitter, Instagram, and LinkedIn update their in-app messaging
capabilities, moving them closer to chat app experiences.

There are two possible futures as messaging becomes more like
electricity, running through everything we use. One future would see
something like the implementation of WeChat in China—wherein people get
pretty much everything they require from a chat app and rarely need to
use the Internet—spread further afield. The second, alternative future
is one wherein messaging technology becomes so diffused across all
digital services that chat apps as separate entities are no longer
necessary.

Depending on how it develops strategically, WhatsApp is currently best
placed to become the electricity of the messaging universe, if it
decides that opening its API is the right way to go.

As we conclude this report with the above future-gazing, there is one
consideration in which we have huge confidence. Regardless of which
messaging platforms rise or fall in the coming years, our messaging
behavior in now deeply and culturally ingrained on a global level. We
may use different apps in slightly different ways, but huge numbers of
people are completely at ease with instant communication on their mobile
phones, whether by text, images, voice, or video. So much so, in fact,
that the behavior could be described as more firmly entrenched today
than TV found itself during its golden age—after all, mobile phones are
far more personal and they're with us everywhere we go.

That being said, news organizations that are able to understand mobile
technologies and develop strategic plans for how to use them are the
ones that will be the most relevant and able to service the audiences of
the future.

Further Reading
===============

Links to blogs and stories about BBC News and instant messaging plat-
forms, Anonymous, 2015, http://bit.ly/BBCNewsChatApps.

B. Evans, “Messaging and Mobile Platforms,” ben-evans.com, 30 March 2015,
http://ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2015/3/24/the-state-of-messaging.

M. Petronzio, “A Brief History of Instant Messaging,” Mashable, 25 October
2012, http://mashable.com/2012/10/25/instant-messaging- history/#on374
oUArEqo.

T. Livingston, “The Race to Become the WeChat of the West,” Medium, 27
November 2014, https://medium.com/@tedlivingston/the-race-to-become-the-
wechat-of-the-west-3fe52c8db946#.x763pp7fk.

B. Sheth, “Forget Apps, Now The Bots Take Over,” 29 September 2015, http:
//techcrunch.com/2015/09/29/forget-apps-now-the-bots-take-over/.

J. Markoff and P. Mozur, “For Sympathetic Ear, More Chinese Turn to Smart-
phone Program,” The New York Times, 31 July 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/
2015/08/04/science/for-sympathetic-ear-more-chinese-turn-to-smartphone-
program.html.

A. Carr, “Inside Snapchat CEO Evan Spiegel's Entertainment Empire,” Fast
Company, 19 October 2015, http://www.fastcompany.com/3051612/innovation-
agents/media-tech-and-advertising-to-snapchat-i-aint-afraid-of-no-ghost.

J. Cook, “Japanese Messaging App LINE is Blowing Up, and These Stats
Prove It,” Business Insider, 3 March 2015, http://www.businessinsider.com/
interview-with-jeanie-han-from-line-2015-3.

J. Trew, “Facebook Tests ‘Reactions,' a Like Button With More Emotions,” 8
October 2015, http://www.engadget.com/2015/10/08/facebook-tests-reactions-a-
like-button-with-more-emotions/.
“Young Canadians' Hopes for a New Era Under Trudeau,” BBC News, 20
October 2015, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-34578079.

Glossary
========

**Chatbot:** A program inside a chat app that is able to interact with a
user based on key terms he or she types in, simulating a basic
conversation. Chatbots are most often used to help users retrieve
specific types of content (e.g., “What is the top news story today?”
would lead to a chatbot delivering a link to the top story on a chosen
website.\

**Shake feature:** Available within apps like WeChat; when a user
physically shakes his or her phone, the app displays other WeChat users
in nearby locations with the option to connect with them.\

**Stickers:** Illustrated or photographic images that chat app users can
easily insert into their conversations instead of text. They are similar
to emojis but are larger in size and can only be sent as standalone
images (in contrast, emojis can appear directly next to letters you
type).\

Users generally download “sticker packs,” which include between 16–40
individual images that can be accessed within the app. Many of the most
popular and effective stickers convey universal emotions like happiness,
love, and anger, or use common phrases and greetings like “hi,” “call
me,” “I love you,” and “goodnight.”\

**Walkie-Talkie mode:** Another feature within WeChat that simulates the
functionality of a walkie talkie, allowing users on two separate phones
to voice chat with each other inside the app.\

Interviewees
============

The people interviewed for this research:\

Bryant Hua, BuzzFeed\
Charlotte Panther, Viber\
Gareth Cliff, Cliff Central Digital Radio\
Jacqui Maher, News Labs, BBC News\
Jennifer Lee, *The Washington Post*\
Lauren Zupkus, The Huffington Post\
Mark Hardy, Viber\
Micha Benolieli, FireChat\
Natalie Miller, UGC Hub, BBC News\
Paul Gray, Kik\
Rod McLeod, Kik\
Ronald Bach, WeChat\
Ryan Kellett, *The Washington Post*\
Samantha Barry, CNN\
Samir Mezrahi, BuzzFeed\
Sarah Marshall, *The Wall Street Journal*\
Sergio Silva, Kik\
Shannon Kelly, Snapchat\
Talya Minsberg, *The New York Times*\

Citations
=========

1. F. Wilson, “What Just Happened?” AVC, 31 December 2014, http://avc.com/
2014/12/what-just-happened/.
2. M. Ballve, “Messaging Apps Are Overtaking Social Networks to Become the Dom-
inant Platforms on Phones,” Business Insider, 10 April 2015, http://www.businessinsider.
com/messaging-apps-have-completely-overtaken-social-networks-to-become-the-
dominant-platforms-on-phones-2015-4.
3. M. Meeker, “Internet Trends 2015—Code Conference,” 27 May 2015, http://
www.kpcb.com/internet-trends.
4. “Are We Watching the Death of SMS?” eMarketer, 2 March 2015, http://www.
emarketer.com/Article/Watching-Death-of-SMS/1012124.
5. B. Evans, “WhatsApp Sails Past SMS, but Where Does Messaging Go Next?”
ben-evans.com, 11 January 2015, http://ben- evans.com/benedictevans/2015/1/
11/whatsapp-sails-past-sms-but-where-does-messaging-go-next.
6. Cook, “Japanese Messaging App LINE is Blowing Up, and These Stats Prove
It.”
7. “Worldwide App Annie Index for Apps June 2015,” App Annie, 23 July 2015,
http://blog.appannie.com/worldwide-app-annie-index-apps-june-2015/.
8. “LINE Corporation Announces 2014 Fiscal Year Results,” LINE, 29 January 2015,
https://linecorp.com/en/pr/news/en/2015/915.
9. Trew, “Facebook Tests ‘Reactions,' a Like Button With More Emotions.”
10. “Tencent Announces 2015 Second Quarter and Interim Results,” Tencent, 12 Au-
gust 2015, http://www.tencent.com/en-us/content/ir/news/2015/attachments/
20150812.pdf.
11. E. Macguire, “South Africa Shock Jock's ‘Uncensored, Un-radio' Station on WeChat,”
CNN, 5 December 2014, http://edition.cnn.com/2014/12/05/business/wechat-
cliff-central-radio-south-africa/.
12. Livingston, “The Race to Become the WeChat of the West.”
13. K. Chaykowski, “Kik, the Teen Messaging Giant, to Focus an U.S. and Viral Ads,”
Forbes, 6 October 2015, http://www.forbes.com/sites/kathleenchaykowski/2015/
10/06/kik-the-teen-messaging-giant-to-focus-on-u-s-and-making-ads-go-viral/.
14. C. Mims, “Advertising's New Frontier: Talk to the Bot,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal, 27 July 2014, http://www.wsj.com/articles/advertisings-new-frontier-talk-to-
the-bot-1406493740.
15. “Status Update,” Facebook, 3 September 2015, https://www.facebook.com/
jan.koum/posts/10153580960970011.
16. T. Barot, “How BBC Ebola WhatsApp Service is Battling Virus and Finding
Great Stories,” BBC College of Journalism, 5 February 2015, http://www.bbc.co.
uk/blogs/collegeofjournalism/entries/0f944ab7-9f96-4091-a927-db826630d997.
Tow Center for Digital Journalism
80 Chat Apps
17. “BBC Have Your Say on WhatsApp,” BBC News, 27 February 2015, http://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-30821245.
18. WhatsApp Web, https://web.whatsapp.com/.
19. A. Daye and R. Irvine-Brown, “Nepal Quake: What Happens to Those Trying
to Help?” BBC News, 12 May 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-32711
653.
20. A. Dugdale, “Snapchat Attempts to Move on From Its Sexting Reputation with
Stories,” Fast Company, 3 October 2013, http://www.fastcompany.com/3019233/
fast-feed/snapchat-attempts-to-move-on-from-its-sexting-reputation-with-stories.
21. T. Minsberg, “Snapchat: A New Mobile Challenge for Storytelling,” The New
York Times, 18 May 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/times-insider/2015/05/18/
snapchat-a-new-mobile-challenge-for-storytelling/?_r=1.
22. “Introducing Discover,” Snapchat, 27 January 2015, http://blog.snapchat.com/
post/109302961090/introducing-discover.
23. Ibid.
24. L. Moses, “Snapchat Tweak Boosts Traffic for Publishers: ‘Our Views Have Dou-
bled',” Digiday, 28 July 2015, http : / / digiday.com/ publishers / snapchat - design -
change-boosts-traffic-publishers-views-doubled/.
25. N. Kulwin, “This Week on ‘Re/code Decode': CEO Jonah Peretti Explains How
BuzzFeed Won the Internet (Updated),” re/code, 16 September 2015, http://recode.
net/2015/09/16/this-week- on- recode- decode- ceo- jonah- peretti- explains- how-
buzzfeed-won-the-internet/.
26. G. Sloane, “Cosmo is Getting 3 Million Readers a Day on Snapchat Discover,”
Digiday, 14 October 2015, http://digiday.com/platforms/cosmo- says- getting- 3-
million-readers-snapchat-discover/.
27. B. Philpott, “The Ticket: The Snapchat Election,” KUT, 21 October 2015, http:
//kut.org/post/ticket-snapchat-election.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid.
30. “Channels: Broadcasting Done Right,” Telegram, 22 September 2015, https://
telegram.org/blog/channels.
31. “Bots: An Introduction for Developers,” Telegram, https://core.telegram.org/
bots.
32. N. Lomas, “Telegram Now Seeing 12BN Daily Messages, Up From 1BN In Febru-
ary,” TechCrunch, 21 September 2015, http://techcrunch.com/2015/09/21/telegram-
now-seeing-12bn-daily-messages-up-from-1m-in-february/.
33. “The Magid Social Media Study 2014,” Magid, 2014, http://www.magid.com/
sites/default/files/pdf/20141230MagidSocialMediaStudy2014KeyFindings.pdf.
34. “Young Canadians' Hopes for a New Era Under Trudeau.”
35. L. Franklin, “Introducing Messenger Platform and Businesses on Messenger,”
Columbia Journalism School
81
Facebook, 25 March 2015, https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2015/03/
25/introducing-messenger-platform-and-businesses-on-messenger/.
36. S. Weitz, “Meet XiaoIce, Cortana's Little Sister,” 5 September 2014, https://
blogs.bing.com/search/2014/09/05/meet-xiaoice-cortanas-little-sister/.
